AS this is one of the most rudimentary of the operations of cookery,
and the most frequently performed, it naturally takes a first place in
treating the subject.

Water is boiled in the kitchen for two distinct purposes: 1st, for the
cooking of itself; 2nd, for the cooking of other things. A dissertation
on the difference between raw water and cooked water may appear
pedantic, but, as I shall presently show, it is considerable, very
practical, and important.

The best way to study any physical subject is to examine it
experimentally, but this is not always possible with everyday means. In
this case, however, there is no difficulty.

Take a thin[1] glass vessel, such as a flask, or, better, one of the
‘beakers,’ or thin tumbler-shaped vessels, so largely used in chemical
laboratories; partially fill it with ordinary household water, and
then place it over the flame of a spirit-lamp, or Bunsen’s, or other
smokeless gas-burner. Carefully watch the result, and the following
will be observed: first of all, little bubbles will be formed,
adhering to the sides of the glass, but ultimately rising to the
surface, and there becoming dissipated by diffusion in the air.

This is not boiling, as may be proved by trying the temperature with
the finger. What, then, is it?

It is the yielding back of the atmospheric gases which the water
has dissolved or condensed within itself. These bubbles have been
collected, and by analysis proved to consist of oxygen, nitrogen, and
carbonic acid, obtained from the air; but in the water they exist by no
means in the same proportions as originally in the air, nor in constant
proportions in different samples of water. I need not here go into the
quantitative details of these proportions, nor the reasons of their
variation, though they are very interesting subjects.

Proceeding with our investigation, we shall find that the bubbles
continue to form and rise until the water becomes too hot for the
finger to bear immersion. At about this stage something else begins to
occur. Much larger bubbles, or rather blisters, are now formed on the
bottom of the vessel, immediately over the flame, and they continually
collapse into apparent nothingness. Even at this stage a thermometer
immersed in the water will show that the boiling-point is not reached.
As the temperature rises, these blisters rise higher and higher,
become more and more nearly spherical, finally quite so, then detach
themselves and rise towards the surface; but the first that make this
venture perish in the attempt—they gradually collapse as they rise, and
vanish before reaching the surface. The thermometer now shows that the
boiling-point is nearly reached, but not quite. Presently the bubbles
rise completely to the surface and break there. Now the water is
boiling, and the thermometer stands at 212° Fahr. or 100° Cent.

With the aid of suitable apparatus it can be shown that the atmospheric
gases above named continue to be given off along with the steam for a
considerable time after the boiling has commenced; the complete removal
of their last traces being a very difficult, if not an impossible,
physical problem.

After a moderate period of boiling, however, we may practically regard
the water as free from these gases. In this condition I venture to call
it cooked water. Our experiment so far indicates one of the differences
between cooked and raw water. The cooked water has been deprived of
the atmospheric gases that the raw water contained. By cooling some
of the cooked water and tasting it, the difference of flavour is very
perceptible; by no means improved, though it is quite possible to
acquire a preference for this flat, tasteless liquid.

If a fish be placed in such cooked water it swims for a while with its
mouth at the surface, for just there is a film that is reacquiring its
charge of oxygen, &c., by absorbing it from the air; but this film is
so thin, and so poorly charged, that after a short struggle the fish
dies for lack of oxygen in its blood; drowned as truly and completely
as an air-breathing animal when immersed in any kind of water.

Spring water and river water that have passed through or over
considerable distances in calcareous districts suffer another change
in boiling. The origin and nature of this change may be shown by
another experiment as follows: Buy a pennyworth of lime-water from a
druggist, and procure a small glass tube of about quill size, or the
stem of a fresh tobacco-pipe may be used. Half fill a small wine-glass
with the lime-water, and blow through it by means of the tube or
tobacco-pipe. Presently it will become turbid. Continue the blowing,
and the turbidity will increase up to a certain degree of milkiness. Go
on blowing with ‘commendable perseverance,’ and an inversion of effect
will follow; the turbidity diminishes, and at last the water becomes
clear again.

The chemistry of this is simple enough. From the lungs a mixture
of nitrogen, oxygen, and carbonic acid is exhaled. The carbonic
acid combines with the soluble lime, and forms a carbonate of lime
which is insoluble in mere water. But this carbonate of lime is to a
certain extent soluble in water saturated with carbonic acid, and such
saturation is effected by the continuation of blowing.

Now take some of the lime-water that has been thus treated, place it in
a clean glass flask, and boil it. After a short time the flask will be
found incrusted with a thin film of something. This is the carbonate
of lime which has been thrown down again by the action of boiling,
which has driven off its solvent, the carbonic acid. This crust will
effervesce if a little acid is added to it.

In this manner our tea-kettles, engine-boilers, &c., become incrusted
when fed with calcareous waters, and most waters are calcareous; those
supplied to London, which is surrounded by chalk, are largely so. Thus,
the boiling or cooking of such water effects a removal of its mineral
impurities more or less completely. Other waters contain such mineral
matter as salts of sodium and potassium. These are not removable
by mere boiling, being equally soluble in hot or cold, aerated, or
non-aerated water.

Usually we have no very strong motive for removing either these or
the dissolved carbonate of lime, or the atmospheric gases from water,
but there is another class of impurities of serious importance. These
are the organic matters dissolved in all water that has run over land
covered with vegetable growth, or, more especially, that which has
received contributions from sewers or any other form of house drainage.
Such water supplies nutriment to those microscopic abominations, the
_micrococci_, _bacilli_, _bacteria_, &c., which are now shown to be
connected with blood poisoning. These little pests are harmless, and
probably nutritious, when cooked, but in their raw and growing state
are horribly prolific in the blood of people who are in certain states
of what is called ‘receptivity.’ They (the bacteria, &c.) appear to be
poisoned or somehow killed off by the digestive secretions of the blood
of some people, and nourished luxuriantly in the blood of others. As
nobody can be quite sure to which class he belongs, or may presently
belong, or whether the water supplied to his household is free from
blood-poisoning organisms, cooked water is a safer beverage than raw
water. I should add that this germ theory of disease is disputed by
some who maintain that the source of the diseases attributed to such
microbia is chemical poison, the microbia (_i.e._ little living things)
are merely accidental, or creatures fed on the disease-producing
poison. In either case the boiling is effectual, as such organic
poisons when cooked lose their original virulent properties.

The requirement for this simple operation of cooking increases with the
density of our population, which, on reaching a certain degree, renders
the pollution of all water obtained from the ordinary sources almost
inevitable.

Reflecting on this subject, I have been struck with a curious fact that
has hitherto escaped notice, viz. that in the country which over all
others combines a very large population with a very small allowance
of cleanliness, the ordinary drink of the people is boiled water,
flavoured by an infusion of leaves. These people, the Chinese, seem in
fact to have been the inventors of boiled-water beverages. Judging from
travellers’ accounts of the state of the rivers, rivulets, and general
drainage and irrigation arrangements of China, its population could
scarcely have reached its present density if Chinamen were drinkers of
raw instead of cooked water. This is especially remarkable in the case
of such places as Canton, where large numbers are living afloat on the
mouths of sewage-laden rivers or estuaries.

The ordinary everyday domestic beverage is a weak infusion of tea,
made in a large teapot, kept in a padded basket to retain the heat.
The whole family is supplied from this reservoir. The very poorest
drink plain hot water, or water tinged by infusing the spent tea-leaves
rejected by their richer neighbours.

Next to the boiling of water for its own sake, comes the boiling
of water as a medium for the cooking of other things. Here, at the
outset, I have to correct an error of language which, as too often
happens, leads by continual suggestion to false ideas. When we speak
of ‘boiled beef,’ ‘boiled mutton,’ ‘boiled eggs,’ ‘boiled potatoes,’
we talk nonsense; we are not merely using an elliptical expression, as
when we say, ‘the kettle boils,’ which we all understand to mean the
contents of the kettle, but we are expounding a false theory of what
has happened to the beef, &c.—as false as though we should describe the
material of the kettle that has held boiling water as boiled copper or
boiled iron. No boiling of the food takes place in any such cases as
the above-named—it is merely heated by immersion in boiling water; the
changes that actually take place in the food are essentially different
from those of ebullition. Even the water contained in the meat is not
boiled in ordinary cases, as its boiling-point is higher than that of
the surrounding water, owing to the salts it holds in solution.

Thus, as a matter of chemical fact, a ‘boiled leg of mutton’ is one
that has been cooked, but not boiled; while a roasted leg of mutton is
one that has been partially boiled. Much of the constituent water of
flesh is boiled out, fairly driven away as vapour during roasting or
baking, and the fat on its surface is also boiled, and, more or less,
dissociated into its chemical elements, carbon and water, as shown by
the browning, due to the separated carbon.

As I shall presently show, this verbal explanation is no mere verbal
quibble, but it involves important practical applications. An enormous
waste of precious fuel is perpetrated every day, throughout the whole
length and breadth of Britain and other countries where English
cookery prevails, on account of the almost universal ignorance of the
philosophy of the so-called boiling of food.

When it is once fairly understood that the meat is not to be boiled,
but is merely to be warmed by immersion in water raised to a maximum
temperature of 212°, and when it is further understood that water
cannot (under ordinary atmospheric pressure) be raised to a higher
temperature than 212° by any amount of violent boiling, the popular
distinction between ‘simmering’ and boiling, which is so obstinately
maintained as a kitchen superstition, is demolished.

The experiment described on pages 8 and 9 showed that immediately the
bubbles of steam reach the surface of the water and break there—that
is, when simmering commences—the thermometer reaches the boiling-point,
and that however violently the boiling may afterwards occur, the
thermometer rises no higher. Therefore, as a medium for heating the
substances to be cooked, simmering water is just as effective as
‘walloping’ water. There are exceptional operations of cookery, wherein
useful mechanical work is done by violent boiling; but in all ordinary
cookery simmering is just as effective. The heat that is applied to
do more than the smallest degree of simmering is simply wasted in
converting water into useless steam. The amount of such waste may be
easily estimated. To raise a given quantity of water from the freezing
to the boiling point demands an amount of heat represented by 180° in
Fahrenheit’s thermometer, or 100° Centigrade. To convert this into
steam, 990° Fahr. or 550° Cent. is necessary—just five-and-a-half times
as much.

On a properly-constructed hot-plate or sand-bath a dozen saucepans
may be kept at the true cooking temperature, with an expenditure of
fuel commonly employed in England to ‘boil’ one saucepan. In the
great majority of so-called boiling operations, even simmering is
unnecessary. Not only is a ‘boiled leg of mutton’ not itself boiled,
but even the water in which it is cooked should not be kept boiling, as
we shall presently see.

The following, written by Count Rumford nearly 100 years ago, remains
applicable at the present time, in spite of all our modern research and
science teaching:

‘The process by which food is most commonly prepared for the
table—BOILING—is so familiar to everyone, and its effects are so
uniform and apparently so simple, that few, I believe, have taken
the trouble to inquire _how_ or in _what manner_ these effects are
produced; and whether any and what improvements in that branch of
cookery are possible. So little has this matter been an object of
inquiry that few, very few indeed I believe, among the _millions of
persons_ who for so many ages have been _daily_ employed in this
process, have ever given themselves the trouble to bestow one serious
thought upon the subject.

‘The cook knows _from experience_ that if his joint of meat be kept
a certain time immersed in boiling water it will be _done_, as it is
called in the language of the kitchen; but if he be asked what is done
to it, or _how_ or _by what agency_ the change it has undergone has
been effected—if he understands the question—it is ten to one but he
will be embarrassed. If he does not understand he will probably answer
without hesitation, that “_The meat is made tender and eatable by being
boiled_.” Ask him if the boiling of the water be essential to the
process. He will answer, “_Without doubt_.” Push him a little further
by asking him whether, _were it possible_ to keep the water _equally
hot_ without boiling, the meat would not be cooked _as soon_ and _as
well_ as if the water were made to boil. Here it is probable he will
make the first step towards acquiring knowledge by _learning to doubt_.’

In another place he points to the fact that at Munich, where his chief
cookery operations were performed, water boils at 209½° (on account
of its elevation), while in London the boiling-point is 212°. ‘Yet
nobody, I believe, ever perceived that boiled meat was less done at
Munich than at London. But if meat may without the least difficulty be
cooked with a heat of 209½° at Munich, why should it not be possible
to cook it with the same degree of heat in London? If this can be done
in London (which I think can hardly admit of a doubt), then it is
evident that the process of cookery, which is called _boiling_, may be
performed in water which is not boiling hot.’

He proceeds to say, ‘I well know, from my own experience, how difficult
it is to persuade cooks of this truth, but it is so important that no
pains should be spared in endeavouring to remove their prejudices and
enlighten their understandings. This may be done most effectually in
the case before us by a method I have several times put in practice
with complete success. It is as follows: Take two equal boilers,
containing equal quantities of _boiling hot water_, and put into them
two equal pieces of meat taken from the same carcase—two legs of
mutton, for instance—and boil them during the same time. Under one of
the boilers make a _small fire_, just barely sufficient to keep the
water _boiling hot_, or rather just _beginning to boil_; under the
other make _as vehement a fire as possible_, and keep the water boiling
the whole time with the utmost violence. The meat in the boiler in
which the water has been kept _only just boiling hot_ will be found to
be quite as well done as that in the other. It will even be found to
be much better cooked, that is to say tenderer, more juicy, and much
higher flavoured.’

Rumford at this date (1802) understood perfectly that the water just
boiling hot had the same temperature as that which was boiling with
the utmost violence, but did not understand that the best result is
obtained at a much lower temperature, for in another place he states
that if the meat be cooked in water under pressure, so that the
temperature shall exceed 212°, it will be done proportionally quicker
and as well. My reasons for controverting this will be explained in the
following chapters.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] In applying heat to glass vessels, thickness is a source of
weakness or liability to fracture, on account of the unequal expansion
of the two sides, due to inequality of temperature, which, of course,
increases with the thickness of the glass. Besides this, the thickness
increases the leverage of the breaking strain.